---
hide:
  - toc
---

# Testing

!!! tip "Quick Links"

    * [Normal, Extreme and Exceptional Test Data](#normal-extreme-and-exceptional-test-data)
    * [Types of Errors](#types-of-errors)
    * [Syntax Errors](#syntax-errors)
    * [Logic Errors](#logic-errors)
    * [Execution Errors](#execution-errors)

Testing is something we as programmers do all the time. 

When you change a program, you run it to check if it works the way you expected. 

For National 5, we put it into a more formal process.

!!! info "What you Need to Know"

    You must be able to Describe, identify, exemplify, and implement normal, extreme, and exceptional test data for a specific problem, using a test table.

    You must be able to describe and identify syntax, execution, and logic errors.

## Normal, Extreme and Exceptional Test Data

When we test a program, we use test data. You enter the test data as the inputs to the program. The data should try to capture a range of different scenarios - don’t just test the program with one piece of data.

As an example:

You are asked to write a program that picks a random number. The user has to guess what number the program has picked. They are asked to enter a number between 0 and 10. If they enter a number outside that range, the program should show an error message.

There are three types of data you need to be able to use and give examples of: normal, extreme and exceptional. In this example, the program expects a number between 0 and 10 (inclusive).

<table class = "testing">
    <tr>
        <th>Normal</th>
        <td>Normal test data is data that is definitely within the expected range. In this case, we could choose 5 (for example), or 2. Both of those are clearly between 0 and 10.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <th>Extreme</th>
        <td>Extreme test data is on the edges of what’s acceptable. In this case, 0 or 10. They should still be accepted by the program - they’re just within range.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <th>Exceptional</th>
        <td>Exceptional test data is clearly and definitely invalid/wrong. For example, in this case, -50 or 10000. Those should definitely be rejected by the program.</td>
    </tr>
</table>

We write this data into a test table. 

The test table shows the data we test the program with. 

We put one example in each row of the table (i.e. don’t say “anything between 1 and 9” - pick one!)

<table class = "testing">
    <tr>
        <th>Test Data</th>
        <th>Type of Testing</th>
        <th>Expected Result</th>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>0</td>
        <td>Normal</td>
        <td>Should be accepted</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>5</td>
        <td>Extreme</td>
        <td>Should be accepted</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>-50000</td>
        <td>Exceptional</td>
        <td>Should be rejected</td>
    </tr>
</table>

In the test table, you should say what you expect the program to do. Some test tables have another column for what actually happened, and you would record this afterwards.

Take another example - rolling a dice. 

You are asked for four pieces of test data: one normal, two extreme and one exceptional. 

Remember that normal data is definitely within range, extreme is on the edge, but accepted, and exceptional is definitely incorrect. 

Which values would be valid for a standard 6-sided dice?

<table class = "testing">
    <tr>
        <th>Test Data</th>
        <th>Type of Testing</th>
        <th>Expected Result</th>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>3</td>
        <td>Normal</td>
        <td>Should be accepted</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>1</td>
        <td>Extreme</td>
        <td>Should be accepted</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>6</td>
        <td>Extreme</td>
        <td>Should be accepted</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>180</td>
        <td>Exceptional</td>
        <td>Should be rejected</td>
    </tr>
</table>

Here, the values 1 and 6 are the minimum and maximum the dice can roll, so they are extreme. They should still be accepted by the program - it’s perfectly valid for a dice to roll 6. However, the dice can’t roll 180, so that is clearly a piece of exceptional test data, because it’s invalid.

You could be asked to give examples of different types of test data, and sometimes to complete the test table.

In the coursework assignment, you’ll usually be given specific data to test your program with. For example, you might be asked to write a program that averages five numbers. Here, you would have to use the test data that you’re given to test your program.

Sometimes, you could be asked to state what the differences are between the three types of test data.


## Types of Errors

There are three types of programming errors that you need to know about - syntax, logic and execution.

If you’re given an example of an error, you need to be able to say what type it is.

Syntax and logic errors occur when you are writing the program; 

execution errors happen when the program is running. 

Of these, syntax errors are usually the easiest to spot.

==Good test data helps you to find and minimise these errors.==

## Syntax Errors

Syntax errors are quite common. You will already have experienced lots of these!

Syntax errors happen when you make a mistake in typing your code. 

These could be spelling mistakes, typing words in the wrong order, or using the wrong symbols.

For example:

* priiiint instead of print
* print(“Hello,” name) instead of print(“Hello”, name)
* range[0, 10] when it should be range(0, 10)

==Syntax errors are about breaking the rules of the language in some way.==

In Python (specifically), you would see an error message. 

==Look at the message carefully== - it tells you which line the error is on (**so you don’t need to check your whole program**).

When you’re doing practical tasks, watch out for these common syntax errors in Python. 

If you’re not sure what’s causing an error, come back to this page and check your code to see if you’ve included one!

=== "Common Syntax Errors"

    ``` python linenums="1"      
    print (Hello World) 
      
    if age = 17: 
        print(“You can drive”)
      
    for counter in range(0, 10)
    print(“This happens 10 times”)       
      
    if age >= 17
        print(“You can drive”)
    else:
        print(“You can’t drive”)        
    ```

=== "Explanation"

    `Line 1 - Missing Speechmarks`

    : Missing speech marks around a string. ==It should be (“Hello world”)==.    

    `Line 3 and 5 - Incorrect use of Comparison Operators`
    
    : Should be the double-equals ==
    Remember to use == when you’re checking if two things are equal

    `Line 6 and 7 - Forgot to Indent`    
    
    : The line that repeats (print) should be indented (tabbed in) as it’s inside the loop.

    ` Line 9, 10, 11 and 12 - Missing Colon`
    
    : Missing the colon ':'  at the end of the first line. 
    If, else and loops should always have a colon, e.g.

    ``` python linenums="1"
    if age >= 17:
        print(...)  
    ```    

## Logic Errors

Logic errors are a bit  trickier to spot. Logic errors don’t produce error messages. 

The program still runs, but it doesn’t do what you’d expect.

> A program is created to check if a number is **between 0 and 10**.

``` python linenums="1"
if rating >= 0 and rating <= 100:
    print(“That is a rating out of 10”)   
```
    
== This is a logic error, because I typed 100 instead of 10.==

The program would still run. There’s no syntax error, so I wouldn’t see an error message. Instead, my logic is wrong.

**Another example:**

> A program should ask a person’s name and age, and then greet them with their name.

``` python linenums="1"
name = input(“What is your name?”)
age = input(“How old are you?”)
print(“Hello”, age, “. You are”, name, “years old.”)
```
That program would still run, but the output wouldn’t make much sense. 

If Bob, aged 15, enters his name and age, the program as it stands would output ==“Hello 15. You are Bob years old”==.

==Testing with appropriate test data is the best way of tracking down logic errors.==

## Execution Errors

Execution errors happen when the program is running. 

Typically, the program will crash with an error message.

> a program asks for two numbers. It plans to divide them.

If the user enters 100 and 0, there will probably be an execution error - the program will crash, because it’s impossible to divide by 0. 

A really good program will check the numbers first, and if one of them is invalid, it will ask the user to enter it again. 

This avoids the program crashing, so saves you from the execution error.

Common execution errors in Python could involve:

* The program asks for a number, but the user enters some text (a string). What happens?
* Lists (you will study these later): if a list has 10 items, but you try to access the 11th item

==We find and (mostly) eliminate execution errors by testing. Exceptional test data is a good way to test for execution errors.==

